# Plasmodium_PopGen

This is an IRT3/Master's thesis project vis-à-vis the EES Masters at LMU, Munich Germany. It is being completed at the Population Genetics Lab, under Prof. Dr. Aurélien Tellier and Prof. Dr Dirk Metzler, at the Technical university of Munich, Germany. 


Recent studies reveal that the Kingman coalescent may not fully capture population dynamics in species with high fecundity and early mortality, like marine organisms and rapidly adapting pathogens2. These species often exhibit "sweepstakes reproduction," where few individuals produce many surviving offspring, leading to multiple lineage mergers[1]. To address this, Multiple Merger Coalescent (MMC) models, such as the Beta-Coalescent[2], have emerged. These models allow for simultaneous mergers, providing a more accurate framework for studying demographic history and genetic diversity.

In Plasmodium falciparum (the malarial parasite) the life cycle involves severe bottlenecks and extreme reproductive variance, both due to within human/mosquito host selection as well as between vector/host transmission, impacting genome evolution. This pattern of recurrent bottlenecks could potentially lead to non-Kingman i.e. multiple merger genealogies. Traditional methods to estimate selection or demography often overlook these dynamics, and performing standard analysis using Kingman assumptions may bias results. Thus, we aim to infer the genomic signatures of multiple merger coalescence through a statistical population genetic analysis of whole genome sequencing data from Plasmodium falciparum samples from South-east Asia, a region experiencing recent drug-resistant parasite burden.  We aim to do this via a combination of analytical approaches, including a descriptive statistical study of patterns of genome wide diversity, selection and recombination, combined with inferential statistical study of parameter inference via an SMC based workflow implemented via the R package eSMC2 [3]. 

We expect genome wide trends in diversity and recombination as theoretically predicted by simulation based studies [4], including a U-shaped derived allele frequency spectrum and long-range dependencies in linkage. The SMC method, (SMβC, developed by Korfmann et al6) builds on the theoretical framework of MSMC, but extends it to handle multiple merger events characteristic of the Beta coalescent. We aim to implement the SMβC, which follows the distribution of the first coalescence event of a sample along sequences assuming a β-coalescent process. SMβC aims to estimate the Beta coalescent parameter α, lower values of which directly indicates a higher frequency and larger multiple merger events. Finally, a validation approach is proposed, which would involve simulating data using SMβC estimated parameters and assessing if the simulations can reproduce key features of the data. We thus aim to detect multiple merger events and better understand life history, reproductive dynamics, and sweepstake-like patterns in Plasmodium falciparum. This approach can refine our understanding of genome evolution and basic biology of the malarial parasite, which could potentially aid in an understanding of its transmission dynamics and help develop effective control strategies against malaria.


[1] Eldon, B. & Stephan, W. Sweepstakes reproduction facilitates rapid adaptation in highly fecund populations. Molecular Ecology 33, e16903 (2024). [2] Kersting, G., Schweinsberg, J. & Wakolbinger, A. The evolving beta coalescent. Electronic Journal of Probability 19, 1–27 (2014). [3] Sellinger, T. P. P., Awad, D. A., Moest, M. & Tellier, A. Inference of past demography, dormancy and self-fertilization rates from whole genome sequence data. PLOS Genetics 16, e1008698 (2020). [4] Korfmann, K., Sellinger, T., Freund, F., Fumagalli, M. & Tellier, A. Simultaneous Inference of Past Demography and Selection from the Ancestral Recombination Graph under the Beta Coalescent. 2022.09.28.508873 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.09.28.508873 (2022).
